---
author: "Kit Marks"
title: "The possibilities of green finance combating climate change (part 2)"
date: 2021-12-10
description: "The barriers preventing the financial system from going entirely carbon neutral"
tags: []
thumbnail: shutterstock_524218915.jpeg
thumbnail_caption: " shutterstock.com"
type: "blog"
---

Part 1 adopted quite an optimistic narrative on how a green financial system could work to create a utopian future where the 1.5-degree centigrade increase from pre-industrial global temperature is curbed. However, there is a multitude of significant barriers that span across industry, politics, and economics, which prevents the financial system from ever fully going entirely carbon neutral.

The political economy of climate change (CC) is all about who will pay for what, when, and how to share the burden of abatement costs, which ultimately shapes the new financial system environmentalists are so passionate about attaining. Considering COP26, developed nations are still falling woefully short of the annual $100 billion climate finance pledge, which is supposed to act as quasi-reparation payments to allow the poorest nations on Earth to adapt their economies to CC (for more information on this, see the COP26 takeaways series).

One barrier is that there is an absence of a common definition of green finance and a lack of international standards, or to cast a different light on it, information asymmetry at the capital markets. This is coupled with an absence of a regulatory and legal framework directly related to green finance. There is also the problem of measuring carbon emissions. Whilst coverage and reporting of Scope 3 emissions (activities from assets not owned or controlled by the reporting organisation, but that the organisation indirectly impacts in its value chain, for instance, the extraction, transportation, and production carbon costs of purchased materials) has improved through greater sustainability reporting and both consumer and board demand for greater corporate transparency (see the ‘G in ESG’ article). Nevertheless, the logistics of attributing fines to specific companies is still a headache. It is easy on paper to command cooperation, but how do an insurer, a creditor and a shareholder distribute the emissions from a chemical company fairly without self-interest rearing its ugly head? This leads to the fact that firms at their core are profit maximisers. CC is a huge risk to investors’ portfolios, but as is backing a ‘green’ company that may not be as green as initially thought (greenwashing), or where the return of return for your investment is far less than that of other companies that could provide shareholders with a more immediate, handsome dividend.

Then there is the ominous fact that some of the biggest emitters are state-controlled companies. The Economist estimates that listed firms that are not state-controlled account for only 14-32% of the world’s emissions. Huge firms like Aramco (the largest producer of oil in the world) and Gazprom (behind the controversial Nord-Stream 2 natural gas pipeline) are not subject to as much influence from private-sector bankers or hedge fund managers as others. They are also tied up in geopolitical conflict. The recent increase in household electricity bills perfectly highlighted how reliant we in Britain are on external energy suppliers, the origins of which predominantly come from oil and natural gas. Putin may discard any notion of Russia using gas as a geopolitical weapon as [“politically motivated blather”](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/10/19/energy-crisis-russia-opts-against-increasing-gas-supplies-to-europe.html), but the fact still remains that the volatility in the supply of gas to Europe since September has added to market anxiety and skyrocketing domestic prices, hardly coincidental considering Nord-Stream 2 has just been built. Recent events act as a signal to Europeans (the EU is considered above China, India, and the US to be furthest along the green trajectory in finance) that there is a need for an additional supply of fossil fuels, perpetuating dependency on a country where oil and gas are responsible for more than 60% of Russia’s exports and provide more than 30% of the country’s gross domestic product (GDP). There is no escaping the simple fact that even in 2021, Big Oil still calls the shots. To achieve a green financial system and mitigate the impacts of climate change, this key input in the global financial machine needs transforming. Fast.

These problems, however large, though, can be solved. A major success of COP26 came from the UK government making it [mandatory for firms to report their carbon emissions](https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-to-enshrine-mandatory-climate-disclosures-for-largest-companies-in-law) from April 2022, the first of the G20 to do so and likely not the last. Legally binding legislation is the only way to advance the climate agenda. A ubiquitous measurement of carbon reporting could provide additional data to signal to the market that measurements for how carbon emissions are disclosed are being standardised. Biden and the US (the second-biggest emitter of GHG) just passed The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act), pledging over a trillion dollars to rejuvenate America’s declining infrastructure with green initiatives, committing it to transition to a net-zero economy. Renewable energy is on the rise and will continue to be well into 2050.

There are a plethora of barriers that need to be overcome before we can claim the global financial system in place is a green one. Too often, the greening process has been drawn out, revised and revisited, and then abandoned. But awareness is growing, momentum towards a green transition is gaining. We can’t afford to take our foot off the proverbial gas, so to speak; we just have to keep applying a bit more pressure.
